---
title: The perils of general purpose computing
tags: programming, guide
---
A general purpose programming language is one which is quite
unconstrained in what you can program with it. It is this lack of
constraint which provides both power and responsibility (as Spiderman or
his Aunt May might remind us).

There are fridge magnets which have individual words on them, so you can
arrange poems on the words on your fridge door for your family and
friends to admire. (For example when you upload the resulting picture to
Facebook, you sad individual.) The words are already discrete units so
you don't have to worry about mis-spelling any of the words. If the word
_brocolli_, (or _brocoli_, or is it even _broccoli_? _Broccolli_?)
appears as one of the words this would help me because as you can see
it's one of my weak spots. The upside is no bad spelling for your
social media friends to laugh at, but the downside is that you're
limited to the set of words included in the pack.

Scrabble is slightly different. You get individual letters or even the
blank (wildcard) tile but the constraint is you choose from 7 at a time
and have to fit into the existing word pattern without forming nonsense
words.

The fridge magnets and the Scrabble tiles aren't the extremes of this
continuum of constraints and freedom. Off past the Scrabble board there
are blank sheets of paper and pens. Beyond the fridge magnets are whole
phrases encoded in coloured blocks --- the [Internation Code of Signals]
[flags] used by ships to indicate unambiguously (and across language
boundaries) important information like "medical assistance needed" or
"vessel sinking".

[flags]: <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Code_of_Signals>
    "Flag signalling from ship to ship"

Programming languages can also exist on this continuum between the fully
expressive but complex --- to the constrained and simple.  Most software
is written in general purpose languages which sit about where Scrabble
sits on the scale above: supporting most things you want to do but often
long-winded and allowing of errors which are easy to make because we're
human. I say "most things" because Scrabble doesn't have punctuation.
Similarly as programmers we find ourselves doing the moral equivalent of
grabbing a marker pen and scribbling something new on a blank tile if
the programming language hasn't got proper support for what we want.
