---
title: Cord&atilde;o de Ouro capoeira with CM Papa Leguas
tags: capoeira
---

Recently Contra Mestre Papa Leguas of Cordao de Ouro was invited to teach
sessions in Edinburgh and Glasgow by [CDO Scotland] [cdos]. I attended one
of the 3-hour classes in Glasgow to expand my experience a bit and see
what other groups do when they're being taught in their own style.

(I have previously been to large workshops organised by Malungos and
Senzala but the guest teacher has been an Angola Mestre --- Camaleao and
Carlao respectively. This was a different circumstance because the teacher
was definitely "something different".)

[cdos]: <http://www.cdoscotland.com/> "Cordao de Ouro Scotland"

The training room in Wellington Church on the corner of Southpark Avenue
and University Avenue is a nice venue. Very clean and neat with some kind
of textured vinyl-like flooring. I arrived and met a few people that I
knew from training in Edinburgh and the regular open roda that we have to
raise money for charity.

The class started with a discussion about body mechanics. The example was
"to do an _au_ you must throw your hips in the air, not put your hands on
the ground" because "to do an _au sem mao_ you must throw your hips in the
air not throw your head at the ground" (paraphrased). I found this
interesting and was looking forward to some biomechanical-oriented
teaching which I think would help me a lot. Sadly it didn't appear.

We did some plenary work on ginga and faking a rabo de arraia and spinning
away again. Looking round the room I wasn't the only person failing to see
what he was actually doing, as he wasn't describing the moves and he was
executing them too fast to really follow.

This sequence built up into something longer, tacking on other moves
which were also poorly understood. This was one of the defining moments of
the class for me. Some of the sections were aimed at quite proficient
players and the group as a whole didn't reflect that. If it had been a
trainers session rather than an open/all-levels session it would have been
understandable.

The pairs work was similarly odd --- maybe more for me than other people,
I don't know. I'm trying to be objective and subjective at the same time.
Or at least subjective with the knowledge that I don't want to come across
as believing "they do it differently so they must be wrong".

At the end was a split roda (one bateria, two simultaneous games) so
everyone could have a few fun games to finish off. The music was something
that took me a bit by surprise. The tempo was fast-paced and the singing
didn't match the rhythm at all. I think it would have been hard to match
the speed of the bateria actually. This in particular was very alien to
me.
