---
title: The elevator pitch for social interaction
tags: work, capoeira
---
The ["elevator pitch"] [pitch] is supposed to be a short, pithy summary
of a topic designed to get someone interested --- imagining you meet
someone very important in a lift and you have only 30 seconds to
introduce yourself and get them to invest in your company or whatever.

[pitch]: <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elevator_pitch>
    "Expanded definition of the elevator pitch"

We have these same kind of things in ordinary social interaction though
normally we call it "getting to the point" and "not being dull". I think
most of the time I am a bit *too* terse without necessary being
explanatory... but there are a couple of standard questions that I find
really awkward to answer.

One --- "what is your job?". I have alternated frequently between "software
engineer", "computer programmer", or variations on that theme but in
themselves they mean nothing. At the moment I'm working for [Calnex
Solutions] [calnex] who make test equipment for network synchronisation
devices and protocols. There is a long explanation of what that means
but it makes people's eyes glaze over just as much as the short
explanation.

[calnex]: <http://www.calnexsol.com>
    "Calnex Solutions, network synchronisation testing"

The product I'm working on is slightly easier to understand than what
most of the company does, so my standard response might involve phrases
like "stress test" (which has plenty of real world equivalents) so I can
cut out the eyes-glazing-over terms like "asynchronous" and "protocol".

Which brings me to question two, the infinitely more seductive "what is
capoeira?" --- seductive because not only is it a real physical thing
which happens on human scales of size and time, unlike networking, but
also because there are so many aspects to it that most people will find
an interesting facet.

The description (popularised by [Nestor Capoeira's book] [nestor]) of
dance-fight-game includes a lot but doesn't really explain much. How do
you dance and fight at the same time? What is the actual *intent* of
what you're doing in capoeira?

[nestor]: <http://northatlanticbooks.com/store/1556434049.html>
    "Capoeira: Roots of the Dance-Fight-Game, by Nestor Capoeira"

The term "combat game" seems to be used in the academic literature to
describe the type of socially-motivated fight simulation that capoeira
fits into. Somewhere at one end is wrestling and boxing, somewhere at a
different end is freestyle rap, and at a third point on the wheel
there's tug of war and arm wrestling. And somewhere in the middle is
capoeira.

But how do you explain anything in those terms, in a pithy phrase? My
old work just used to call it my "kung fu dancing".
