---
title: Promoting a more cerebral capoeira
tags: capoeira
---

## Getting better.

Getting together to examine videos of games, either Mao Tudo DVD (the
Dion/Lucio flow work?) or other content from the internet. Get other
people's views on the games, have people point out things you cannot see.

Analysis and criticism of each other, more feedback and technical analysis
where desired. If we can video our own games this links in with the above
aim to watch and criticise games in general.

Learning what can be learned from other people --- handbalancing, flow,
cardio training, flexibility. Take up classes in other things to learn
other ways to move. Judo, gymnastics, Contact Improvisation (Contact
Jam?), yoga and others.

## Getting more practise.

Moving up to twice a week will be a big boost for those that can manage
it, and maybe more musical work. People interested can get together for
music practise some time.

Having a regular roda in Glasgow like the Edinburgh charity rodas, open to
other groups, would be great to forge stronger links and make us seem less
isolated. Combine that with visiting the Edinburgh charity when possible
to increase participation in games!

## Getting more members.

Promotion through posters, getting away from the boring representations of
capoeira which don't reflect what we do as a group, or what we want to do.
I'd prefer a greater emphasis on the social and ludic aspects --- we
should not be advertising capoeira but using the idea of _vadiar_ as a
central theme (see various meetings called "Vadiando entre amigos"). Nobody
can turn down the idea of hanging around with friends...

This also emphasises the roda and the game over the training as the
central and important element.

Be visible in the public eye, including playing outdoors when possible ---
which includes getting used to playing on grass or gravel rather than
indoor floors.

Training "canned" sequences to the point we would be comfortable doing
them in public. Providing background information to the game, a full
education rather than just a demonstration which is quite opaque and
inscrutable to watch.

The "money game" is quite an interesting one that I think we should
explore. It's capoeira with an externally visible "purpose" which is
more interesting to watch for people who wouldn't otherwise know what
they're seeing.
