---
title: Public speaking and presentation --- post match analysis
tags:
---

My recent [foray into the realm of public speaking] [prematch] went really
well. I presented what was initially going to be a 30 minutes talk on
functional programming, which in the end last for closer to 45 minutes.

During development the topic changed from Haskell to functional
programming in general to, ultimately, code reuse. I used Haskell as an
example language to show ways in which custom control-flow operations
(from the basic `map` and `fold` to the more abstract `>>=`) lets you
write less code with more consistent semantics and pave the way for
parallelising code if necessary.

The [slides and notes are available on GitHub] [slides]. Both documents
are written in Markdown. I used Pandoc with support for the Reveal.js
presentation framework to create a slick set of slides. (I think the look
of the slides came across really well, compared to the usual Powerpoint
fare.)

I wrote most of the presentation in prose format to begin with so that I
had my ideas fully formed. I think this really helped form a cohesive
story. In the past I've gone straight from "half-baked idea" to "creating
slides" and there hasn't been an easy sequence. Coming up with an initial
story meant that I really knew what I was trying to say and most of the
time knew what slide was coming up next without peeking.

I am definitely more influenced by the Takahashi and Lessig schools of
presentation authoring --- really minimising the amount of stuff on
screen. The other important thing is not to read what is on screen. I
think this is where coming up with a narrative first was really helpful:
the slides I produced in the end were illustrations of my words, rather
than the words being descriptions of my illustrations.

Obviously the totally-minimalist presentation style isn't appropriate if
you want to show code, which often requires four or five lines of text.
But it's still much better than two columns of small text with bullet
points and a graph all on screen at once.

One thing I did learn from the actual presentation on the day --- apart
from the need to assume technical difficulties with the projector --- is
that the colour and detail you get projected onto the wall (even in a dark
room) is much worse than the slides on your screen. I did a test run with
the television at home but that still didn't give me a proper idea how bad
the final display would be. Err on the side of thicker lines and greater
contrast between colours. I had one tree diagram illustrating an inverted
tree. The branches of the tree were just black lines and became totally
invisible when projected despite looking fine on my screen and on our
television.

The total experience for me was a lot more relaxed than I was expecting.
Whether this was due to good preparation, confidence in my knowledge of
the subject, more self-confidence or other things that I can't pinpoint
right now, we'll never know. I felt really in control and for the rest of
the day was on a total high.

[prematch]: </posts/2013-10-13-aaargh-public-speaking.html>
    "Previous thoughts (anxiety) on public speaking"
[slides]: <http://github.com/dougalstanton./intro-to-fp/>
    "Source for slides and notes"
