---
title: Roda with Glasgow Senzala and Professor Ouri√ßo
tags: capoeira
---

The Glasgow Senzala recently had an open roda and workshop with
Professor Ourico[^1]. I didn't make it for the workshop but managed to
get there for most of the roda.

[^1]: This apparently means hedgehog!

I realise only now (about a week later?) that this was probably my first
roda as a proper outsider. There was a workshop but I didn't attend.
The group was not an angola group. The leader of the roda was not an
angoleiro. I think every roda I have attended in the past at least one
of these things has been familiar to me but this time round everything
was foreign.

At the time I felt very unsure how much I should "remain true" and how
much I should try to compromise for the capoeira that was, to some
degree, expected. The music was very fast --- should I play fast all the
time? That's not really something I can sustain. I realised soon that it
wasn't something that other people could manage.

The "speed dating" approach to capoeira (as Simon described it, at
least) left me unsure how interact. I felt rude buying into a game
before it really got started; but then if I didn't buy in somebody else
would and then I'd never get to play. Once I'd cut in there was no
chance for the game to warm up and develop; it was just straight in
there full speed ahead all the time. And while there may be a time and a
place for that I really missed the chance to play a decent length game.
(Of course it re-emphasised what I feel is good about the slow
development and slower games. I often struggle not to push things to the
next level so this is a lesson I would do well to learn!)

I also felt unsure around so many people who seemed unsure themselves,
or at least were obviously not experts. Was I being too
harsh/aggressive? I'm not a very unpredictable player by any means but
unfamiliarity makes everything seem twice as unpredictable --- they
didn't know me and I didn't know them. They moved differently so I had a
harder time telling the relative levels of expertise.

It's a tricky one but overall I would definitely like to go for more
rodas there because they did things so differently.
