---
title: Cooking by ratios: the book
tags: cooking, books
---

I'm not a great cook and very much envy the just-throw-stuff-together
style of cookery which some people have. The exacting sciences of mixed
drinks and bread baking provide some solace for me, because they're all
about the correct mixing of ingredients in well defined ratios.

It seems obvious that a book called _Ratio: The Simple Codes Behind the
Craft of Everyday Cooking_ would be something right up my street. Michael
Ruhlman attempts to argue that much more of cooking follows rules of
proportion and ratio --- and that lack of emphasis on this fact leaves
people slavishly following recipes without understanding the fundamentals.
Each subtle variation is a "new" recipe.

_Ratio_ is his solution: a book of recipes by proportion. His introduction
stipulates the important rule that ratios should be understood by weight
not volume because the quantity of dry ingredients will vary a lot when
packed. The cornflakes rule: contents may settle during transit.

We're barely out of the starting blocks before he starts breaking his
rules. Flour in cups, butter in sticks (what?), broccoli in cups...

Then we get to the cake chapter and he flat out says --- the ratio isn't
important! The proportions of sponge and pound cake are identical! So
we're less than a fifth into the book and he's already working hard to
demolish his whole argument.

I didn't follow any of the recipes though some of them looked dubious.
Other people who read the book before me thought his pastry was totally
wrong. But right or not, I didn't come away feeling that I understood the
ingredients at any deeper level. His recipes were just as confusing as if
they'd been given as predefined measures. Apart from a dartboard-style
diagram on the front cover there weren't any useful charts to explain how
the recipes related to each other and the proportions and ingredients
used.

Starting again from scratch --- with a more technical approach to the
subject and a more discriminating eye for the examples --- and this book
could be a real winner. I really wanted to like it, but so many things
annoyed me.

To take a contrasting example, _Dough_ by Richard Bertinet uses the same
approach to ratios but devotes an entire book to (in essence) just one
ratio: ten parts flour to seven parts water. In _Dough_ the technical
detail is omitted because there are so many examples. _Ratio_ has neither
technical explanation nor deep coverage, but instead flits from chapter to
chapter.

If there are other treatments of this topic out there I would be
interested to hear what they're like.
