---
title: Thoughts on Aliveness in Capoeira
tags: capoeira
---
There doesn't seem to be much written on this topic online --- at least
not in English. I recommend you read [Matt Thornton's extended essay on
the topic] [defn] for the full analysis of "aliveness" in training ---
he's one of those writers who would rather write ten thousand words than
stop after 1000 but ultimately it's a worthwhile read. I enjoyed it
anyway, and it plays to my prejudices about scepticism and empiricism.

The summary is obvious and boring when written like this: you must train
under the circumstances you want to perform because in high pressure
situations it will all fall apart.

The idea was formalised for martial arts training. If you don't train
against opponents who are resisting you every step of the way then
you'll never really know how you'll react "in real life", whether that's
in the ring or not. Martial arts which don't emphasise working against
other people don't produce competent fighters.

The three elements identified by Matt Thornton's definition are
_movement_, _timing_ and _energy_. Each of these elements can be trained
without spontaneity (even with a partner) and this is a less "real"
training scenario. At one end of the scale the movement is prescribed,
the timing is stop/start and the energy enough to move but no more. At
the other end of the scale the movement is unpredictable, the timing
fast and the energy continuous.

I think it's clear how at one end of the scale is a slow-motion
demonstration and the other end is an unscripted fight. The idea of
"aliveness" is that training should be performed as near to the second
end of the scale as possible at all times while still remaining safe for
the practitioners. Matt Thornton also suggests quickly scaling up to the
point where that initial static demonstration becomes a spontaneous
clash.

What does this have to do with capoeira? How "alive" is capoeira
training? It seems that "aliveness" is often mistaken for
"effectiveness" or other less-measurable statement --- probably because,
in the field it was conceived to explain, "aliveness" inferred
"effectiveness". Martial arts which train with resistive opponents
(judo, BJJ, boxing, Muay Thai and so on) are also the ones with the best
reputations for sporting success in mixed martial art competitions.

But in the training for judo, they train for judo matches. In training
for boxing, they train for boxing matches. Certain situations are
ignored. (If you want proof, have a look for some MMA matches between
pure boxers and kickboxers. The shock when the boxer *really* realises
there's another game going on beneath waist height makes it all the more
emotional to watch.) The adaptability to other circumstances is a lucky
combination of good training and effective moves. That's not why people
train with "aliveness".

I am not going to talk much about the "street effectiveness" of
capoeira. I think it's a silly topic with too many unstated assumptions
that need pinned down first. But I do think that the idea of "training
with aliveness" has direct applications to capoeira *as it is played*. I
mean training capoeira to play in a roda. This is a much easier topic to
discuss and doesn't put capoeira on a different footing from judo or
boxing. The only difference is the "ruleset", which in capoeira is often
obscure, unwritten and idiosyncratic.

The ideas of spontaneous movement, erratic timing and unpredictable
energy are almost defining features of capoeira. Training for a roda
should require lots of this and I think in most cases it does. But the
roda can be a strange place where predictability is courted anyway ---
set pieces and chamadas exist and are used with some degree of
frequency. Sometimes they're used as they are learnt and often they are
used as traps --- shared jokes in which the setter of the trap and the
person entering both know what can happen and want to test themselves
against the conventions. The difference between a straight run and a
trap is of course impossible to tell under afterwards.

There is also a lot to learn about capoeira outside of the martial
movements of the roda. Singing, music and ritual are as important to it
all and they require a great deal of co-ordination and co-operation. Not
everything you learn in class can be against resisting partners!

The only downside I can really see (apart from maybe a de-emphasis of
the playfulness?) is that it's really hard work. But that's not
surprising --- the very act of their resistance requires work to
overcome what your partner wants to do. It demands greater fitness and
greater mental effort. But both of these aspects force the body into
getting better in themselves.

[defn]: <http://www.straightblastgym.com/aliveness101.html>
	"Aliveness 101 by Matt Thornton"
