---
title: Minor road accident on the way home
tags: cycling
---
Nearly two weeks ago I was cycling home from work, at most ten minutes
away from the house, when I hit a car. The lights up ahead had changed
to green and the vehicle in front moved away. My chain was making an odd
noise so I looked down, which was my mistake.

According to the driver in front, a bus changed lanes in front and she
slowed when I was expecting her to speed away. I slammed right into the
back of the car, went over the top and hit my face on the boot. My right
knee also hit the car and I still have some good discolouration there.
Then I fell sideways --- to my left, towards the pavement, thankfully
--- and crushed my shoulder under my full body weight. I have a thin
scrape on my shoulder and a scab on the outside of my left knee. I think
I hit my head on the road too, though my helmet has nothing to say on
the matter. I certainly had a very sore neck for several days
afterwards.

I was winded and numb down my left side for some time. The couple I had
hit were very kind; definitely the nicest people I could hope to have
been in an accident with. They loaded my bike into the boot and gave me
a lift home.

I took the bike in for a service today and asked the mechanic to pay
particular attention to the front wheel/forks. Other than the immediate
issue of the impact it needed a thorough retune anyway. It's clean and
looks in good nick but it still picks up a fair amount of wear and tear.

And since I hit my head I should probably look at a replacement helmet.
They're supposed to be single-use items but it did its one job well.

I walked to work for the rest of the week, and since then I've been
cycling more gingerly. In time I will get my confidence back and when I
get my bike back from the shop I can hop on it with the knowledge that
everything is working and ready to perform to the best of its abilities.

It's an odd sensation being without a bike and watching many other
people cycle past. I think I notice cyclists much more when I am walking
--- and more different types of cyclists too. I wonder what kind of
cyclist I am? At the moment, the Recovering Cyclist.
