---
title: A wee tour round Islay
tags: holiday, cycling
---
Between the end of term and the start of Helen's elective we took a week's
holiday in Scotland on the bikes. We ferried and cycled from Ardrossan
Harbour on the west coast, around the top of Arran, over to the Mull of
Kintyre and then across from there to Islay.

We spent five days on Islay staying at [a B&B in (well, near) Bowmore] [bnb],
heading to different directions. Basically we spent five days doing as
many distillery visits as we could get away with, which was pretty good
fun to be honest. They're interesting and --- since it's such a key part
of Scottish culture and economy --- it is worthwhile knowing how it
actually works.

[bnb]: <http://www.dha-urlar-bed-and-breakfast.co.uk/>
    "Dha Urlar bed & breakfast"

The places we visited were, in order, Bowmore, Bruichladdich, Ardbeg,
Laphroaig and Caol Ila. There are eight distilleries on the island but we
only managed to cover five of them. They're not quite evenly distributed
across the island --- they tend to cluster near the main ports of Port
Askaig in the north or Port Ellen in the south.

They all have their own selling point in terms of tradition --- whether
their barley is all grown on the island, or all Scottish; whether it's all
malted locally, or malted by hand; and so on for the peating, the milling,
the material and antiquity of the mash tuns and washbacks, etc. You could
make a very large multi-dimensional graph with this information! The one
distillery that seems to do everything as traditionally as it is possible
is Kilchoman, which we didn't visit in the end. Something to return for!

Being on the bikes we didn't have much scope for shopping. We bought a
bottle of the Laphroaig Quarter Cask (aged in firkins for the greater
area-to-volume ratio). Several of the tours also let you take your tasting
glass away with you after the tour, so we've got a good set of those too!

The weather was clear and pleasant --- open to the Atlantic as you would
expect but not rain-lashed as we feared. Apart from a brief spell fighting
against the wind when travelling from Ardbeg to Laphroaig along the south
coast (and realising Helen had left her purse behind at the last
distillery; the lovely woman at the visitor centre drove up to Ardbeg
to collect it while we went on the tour) the weather worked entirely in
our favour.

On the way through we stayed the night on Arran at Lochranza before
getting the ferry in the morning. On the way home we did it all in one
shot --- leaving the bed and breakfast at 8.30 for the hour's ride to Port
Ellen and the ferry to Kennacraig. Then it was up the first brutal hill of
the day and over to the other side of the peninsula for the ferry to
Arran, the second brutal hill of the day around Arran and a terrifying
ride down the other side to the gentle coastal route to Brodick ferry port
and home. To fully assert our awesomeness we stopped off at a supermarket
for a couple of drinks and went straight to a flat party instead of going
home. (To be fair we didn't even stay a full 2 hours but that's not bad
going.) The rest that night was good.
