---
title: Mestre Marrom workshop in London
tags: capoeira, workshop, travel
---
Mestre Marrom was in north London doing a capoeira workshop at the
weekend (20--22 September 2013). Various people from Mao No Chao went
down from Scotland. I took the sleeper bus down on the Friday night with
a handful of others and we arrived in London at 7am. Luckily we had
planned for this and made enquiries of the best greasy spoon to get
breakfast near to the workshop venue. Somewhere called Crystal Cafe in
Homerton, I think.

I'd never met Marrom so this was a first. There were a lot of people
from many London groups and further afield too. The hall was slightly
too small for the number of people. When we were working in lines it was
easy for the people at the edges of the rooms to run out of space when
travelling sideways or backwards. It also made seeing across the crowd
of people difficult.

We did some bits of pair work, and some sequences down the hall singly
and in pairs. Then a double roda with a single bateria and at the end of
each day a full roda. A number of local mestres came in for this --- it
was good to see them play --- Fantasma, Axe, Joaozinho, Polaco and
probably others who I forget. It was great to see all the different
styles of play.

Overall I felt totally out of place being there. The level of skill was
so far out of reach for me that I was just getting in the way. I
basically spent the whole weekend uncomfortable and anxious without
really taking anything in.

Marrom's capoeira is very direct and grounded. It doesn't give much
away. Apart from ground --- I often thought he escaped a long way out of
an attack, often to re-enter very quickly with a hard attack. But quick
chapas were something of a theme, both of his style and the weekend.
