---
title: What is capoeira anyway?
tags: capoeira
---

Doing something obscure like capoeira comes with the risk of being asked
what it is. Unlike karate or BASE jumping or African drumming the answer
is neither common knowledge nor easily to summarise. Nestor Capoeira
called it the dance--fight--game, which I will go out on a limb as being
a pretty atrocious description while at the same time being totally
true. Work that one out.

I have previously called it "an Afro-Brazilian martial art crossing the
boundaries of game, dance, ritual and fight", which is not much better
to be honest. It just expands on Nestor's definition by adding the word
_ritual_ in there.

The various elements all vying for inclusion in a good description ---
movement, music, play, acrobatics, song, ritual, fight, dance --- are
just as much in opposition in definition as they are in capoeira itself.
What is playful about a fight? What is ritualised about play? What is
acrobatic about song? What is musical about movement?

Maybe the answer is to describe only what you see. It is a game of two
people in a circle of others. The crowd who form the circle produce
music which dictates the mood of the activity in the circle. The two
inside move to the rhythms, controlling the space and responding to each
others' movements. The interaction can be aggressive or playful and
is often both in quick succession. The game ends when either players or
music stop. There are no points to be tallied or need to decide a
winner: it is played for the sake of the game itself.
