---
title: The game is a reflection of the players
tags: capoeira
---
I enter the roda wanting to play elegantly and beautifully --- wanting
to be in control of myself. If the other person is playing at a level
where I don't feel threatened then I can concentrate on myself, and how
the interaction feels. But when the pressure is turned up I concentrate
on being in control of the other person. If the other person is playing
above my level and I feel threatened then the urge to "fight back"
starts to dominate. I start to lose what little control I had over
myself in a futile attempt at mastery over the situation.

This has wider implications than just my growth as a capoeirista. The
immediate requirements --- to try twice as hard to play really well and
be in control of myself, and let everything else fall out as it may ---
are fairly clear. Being more comfortable with my shortcomings and all
that.

But there is more than that. This is the roda as a microcosm for life
and social interaction. This illustrates how I react when I'm out of my
depth. I would rather fake it than be honest about my shortcomings: in
the roda I will be slapdash and uncontrolled rather than controlled but
underwhelming; in life I would rather remain silent and appear competent
than ask questions. I would rather appear angry than incompetent.

* * *

A common interview question is to ask about weaknesses. What the real
intention behind this question is nobody knows any more. Some people
recommend trying to spin a positive to seem like a bad thing ("oh I'm
too hard working") while others say this is too obvious and you should
be honest but show how you mitigate this. I suppose we can all agree
that admitting to kleptomania or torturing kittens will probably not go
in your favour.

What nobody talks about is that spotting your own flaws can be really
incredibly difficult. They are hard to spot and harder to admit to
yourself as real problems. Just writing the above passages is quite
painful, even though in hindsight *I always knew this to be true*. I
can think of countless scenarios where they apply.

I don't know what I will do in the future with this extra level of
self-knowledge.
