---
title: Star Trek Into Darkness a spectacle but nothing more
tags: movie, review
---
We saw _Star Trek Into Darkness_ last night, the second film since
Hollywood decided to restart the series by showing us young Kirk, young
Spock etc, before the events of the original television series. In fact,
the film ends at the beginning of the "five year mission" that is part of
the opening monologue for _Star Trek_.

<a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/matthewsheean/3636722887/"
title="Star Trek Guys by Matthew Sheean, on Flickr"><img
src="http://farm4.staticflickr.com/3390/3636722887_713cbdf8f8.jpg"
width="323" height="500" alt="Star Trek Guys"
style="float:left;margin-right:10px;"></a>


This film was disappointing for many insubstantial reasons. Much of the
scenes were lifted from previous Star Trek --- if you know your lore
you'll be guessing (correctly) how scenes unfold from the opening lines.
So, heavy nods to the fans on this one, but for no particular reason.

Also, the bad guys in this were a bit underdeveloped. John Harrison, the
spy played by Benedict Cumberbatch (Hollywood's English-bad-guy _du jour_:
move over Alan Rickman), is another nod to the fans^[I'm trying not to
give spoilers here so bear with me.] and a well-known character, though
it's getting to the point that some people have so many "origin stories"
that they're no longer discrete people. They are personality probability
functions which depend on the observer to show something new at each
moment. Some stories make full use of this --- the Joker eventually made a
career of lying about how he got his smile --- but when everybody starts
doing it the novelty quickly wears thin.

I was not angry at the story like I was angry coming away from
_Prometheus_ but they could certainly have made a more coherent tale. They
spent so long in the last film bringing together the crew we know and
love. This film made an inexpert attempt to drive a wedge between them but
some of the premises were so hamfisted (the world's weakest lovers' tiff
between Spock and Uhura) that I was bored of the attempts.

Who else has seen it? Any humble opinions?
