---
title: First day on the ski slopes (indoors)
tags: skiing
---

If you're going to try skiing then obviously you'd try it indoors for
the authentic experience.

![Indoor ski slope][pic]


We're going away to France next month and I spent yesterday morning at
[Snow Factor] [ski], "Scotland's only indoor ski slope". Just to add to
the ersatz authenticity they even have a bar/restaurant you can ski
straight into for beer and sausage. Yep, "Bar Varia".

[ski]: <http://www.snowfactor.com>
    "It's a massive big shed full of probably-snow"

Anyway I was there at 8.30 for a 9am lesson in not-falling-over and
not-being-terrified. They provide 5 major skills lessons with the idea
being that once you've mastered all the skills you're (a) ready to ski
unsupervised on their indoor slope and (b) you should have a pretty good
grounding of the basics should you want to go outdoors.

My session yesterday covered Skills 1 and 2 --- introduction to skis and
how to get into/out of them; standing, moving on the flat and not
falling over; maintaining balance and slowing down on a slope; and turning.

The pre-lesson setup was quite poor. The website advertises
"introduction to fitting and equipment" but that basically amounts to
them saying "what size shoes do you take?" and letting you get on with
it. They have a fancy machine that measures your height and weight and
interrogates you on your skiing style (a bit odd to ask a beginner,
surely?). The printout produced tells the people working at the
equipment counter what to give you but no explanation is provided as to
why you were asked these questions and what you have let yourself in for
by answering one way or another.

Through the doors we came to the foot of two slopes. The larger of the
two was just a leisure slope with skiiers and snowboarders enjoying
themselves. The smaller (and shallower) one was the instruction slope
where we spent the day. At the far end of the valley between the two
slopes was an ice climbing wall (looked a bit like a pillar of pale blue
Swiss cheese) and further up the hill a sledging and rubber ring course.

Our initial tasks were one-footed. We learned to clip and unclip
one-footed, move around the flat on one ski and --- starting from a few
metres up the slope --- ski downhill one on ski. This was *really* hard
and nobody managed it consistently, especially moving to your weaker
leg.

Two skis proved much easier when it came to actual skiing
(unsurprisingly). My only complaint initially was that because it was a
large group (about ten) there was a lot of queueing and waiting between
short attempts at skiing. Once the group started to be separate into
different skill levels for more practise it became easier for everyone
to improve.

I've booked another lesson for Skill 3, which I think is more nuanced
turning skills. Until then, stay frosty!

* * *

Photo courtesy of [Brian Digital](http://flic.kr/p/r2pbJ) on Flickr.

[pic]: <http://farm1.staticflickr.com/105/283185506_fcd4816329.jpg>
    "Snow Factor, or Xscape as it seems to have been called in the past"
