---
title: Settling into new job
tags: work, "embedded development"
---

That's been three months in my new job now --- I know this because today
I passed my probation and became a "proper" employee.

I have settled into the daily work, which is doing embedded development
for [the Attero network impairment device] [attero]. It's a device for
letting you fake failure in a network, so you can design a system that
will be able to cope with different types of failure. (Talk to a sales
representative now!) 

[attero]: <http://www.spirent.com/Products/Attero>
    "Spirent Attero powered by Calnex Solutions"

The trials of embedded development are the same as ever --- in order to
recreate a problem or test a fix you have to spend an extraordinary
amount of time looking for cables.

The commute is less stressful than my old one. I don't do much
travelling on the roads any more. As the day gets longer I will probably
do even less as cycling to Linlithgow train station around the loch will
be a viable alternative to the main road through the town. Linlithgow is
a nice little place but it's total madness on the roads. The route
through the town is not much wider than two cars in places but that
doesn't stop full-sized lorries and coaches travelling through. The
whole town is a 20MPH zone though I'm doubtful many vehicles pay
attention to that either.

If I don't get to work via the loch I can get to an accessible
supermarket on Monday morning to buy fruit and breakfast cereal for the
week. Though somehow the Linlithgow Sainsburys has managed to find a
design of bike rack that is slightly too fat for the standard Kryptonite
D-lock.

I've been out a few times at lunch for a short cycle but the path round
the loch gets busy with dog walkers during the day. When the weather
gets warmer still I hope to get out there properly. Many people go to
the gym or the pool at lunch so getting out for a ride seems very
reasonable. And maybe one day I'll cycle a bit further on my commute ---
somewhere along the canal to the Falkirk Wheel maybe --- before hopping
on a train for home.
